C in CAP or ACID

Issues:
Single Point of Failure
Cost of Vertical Scaling
Latency  between remote servers => one temporaray solution is caching 

data replication or horizontal scaling is the solution
but consistency is the issue

we will use TCP
Through ACK we know the consistent update happened
If we dont get ACK retry

Retry:
Polling: polling is a technique that the client periodically asks the server if there are messages available. 
Depending on polling frequency, polling could be costly. 
Long polling:
Because polling could be inefficient, the next progression is long polling 
In long polling, a client holds the connection open until there are actually new messages available or a timeout threshold has been reached.
Once the client receives new messages, it immediately sends another request to the server, restarting the process. 

one drawback: Sender and receiver may not connect to the same chat server. HTTP based servers are usually stateless.
If you use round robin for load balancing,
the server that receives the message might not have a long-polling connection with the client who receives the message.

When A gets an update and want B also to update 
A needs ACK from B before commiting
and B also needs ACK of ACK which is ACK ACK from A before commiting
Only this can ensure both A and B are in consistent state
If any network failure happens ACK and ACK ACK are not received then they will not commit.
This is 2 Generals problem

Solution: Leader Assignment

leader can only update or write
follower can read only
like master slave

But what is the network between master and slave broke .. master has an update slave isnt consistent with?

Solution:
have multiple followers
2 Phase commit
prepare
commit 
just lik ACK and ACK ACK and retry commit or rollback in case of network failures
you take a lock and availability becomes issue in case of waiting and deadlock. But is strongly consistent
Transaction is idempotent. But at the system being down.
may not be required
Sometime eventual consistency is required and it comes with isolation guarantees.






