if a view is created on a table , then the table changes , then will the view accomodate new rows?
Yes, a view will automatically reflect new rows added to the base table. A view is not a separate copy of data, but rather a stored query that retrieves its data dynamically from the underlying base table(s) every time it is accessed. 
Here's a breakdown of how a view behaves when the underlying table changes:
Inserts and deletions: Any new rows added to the base table that meet the WHERE clause criteria of the view will be visible the next time the view is queried. Similarly, any rows deleted from the base table will disappear from the view.
Data updates: Changes to existing data in the base table will be reflected instantly in the view.
Schema changes (adding columns): This is a key exception to the automatic update behavior. If you use SELECT * when creating a view, and then later add a new column to the base table, the view's definition will not automatically update. To include the new column, you must explicitly drop and re-create the view.
Materialized views (special case): Some database systems offer "materialized" or "indexed" views, which are a different kind of view that does store a physical copy of the data. These views do not update automatically and must be refreshed manually or on a predefined schedule to reflect changes in the base tables. 
How views work
Think of a view as a window or a lens that provides a customized, secure, or simplified perspective on the data in a base table.
Without a view:
sql
-- You must type the full query every time
SELECT FirstName, LastName, PhoneNumber
FROM Employees
WHERE Department = 'Sales';
Use code with caution.

With a view:
sql
-- Create the view once
CREATE VIEW SalesContacts AS
SELECT FirstName, LastName, PhoneNumber
FROM Employees
WHERE Department = 'Sales';

-- Later, query the view, and the data is always up-to-date
SELECT * FROM SalesContacts;
Use code with caution.

When you run SELECT * FROM SalesContacts;, the database engine simply executes the original SELECT statement that defined the view, ensuring that it returns the most current data from the Employees table. 
AI responses may include mistakes. Learn more



if view is accessing base table everytime a view is queried by the client what is the advantage then of creating a view
Creating a view is about data abstraction and security, not performance. A view is a virtual table defined by a stored query that is executed every time a client accesses it, so it does not offer a performance advantage over querying the base table directly. A view's benefits lie in its ability to simplify, control, and organize data access. 
3 reasons to use views instead of tables in Power BI! - Data ...
PostgreSQL View vs Materialized View: A Guide
SQL CREATE VIEW Statement: How to Use It and Best Practices ...
SQL Views: A Comprehensive Guide
3 reasons to use views instead of tables in Power BI! - Data ...
Benefits of using views
Simplify complex queries
Views allow you to hide the complexity of a query involving multiple tables, complex joins, or calculations behind a simple, reusable virtual table. 
Example: Instead of a developer having to write a complex query with multiple joins every time they need to generate a sales report, a database administrator (DBA) can encapsulate that query in a view. 
Without a view:
sql
SELECT c.name, o.order_date, p.product_name, oi.quantity * p.price AS total_price
FROM customers c
JOIN orders o ON c.customer_id = o.customer_id
JOIN order_items oi ON o.order_id = oi.order_id
JOIN products p ON oi.product_id = p.product_id
WHERE o.order_date >= '2025-01-01';
Use code with caution.

With a view:
sql
-- The DBA creates the view once
CREATE VIEW Q1_Sales_Report AS
SELECT c.name, o.order_date, p.product_name, oi.quantity * p.price AS total_price
FROM customers c
JOIN orders o ON c.customer_id = o.customer_id
JOIN order_items oi ON o.order_id = oi.order_id
JOIN products p ON oi.product_id = p.product_id
WHERE o.order_date >= '2025-01-01';

-- A developer can now run a simple query
SELECT * FROM Q1_Sales_Report;
Use code with caution.

Enhance security
Views can act as a security layer by restricting a user's access to only the specific data they are authorized to see. You can grant a user permission to query a view but deny them direct access to the underlying tables, protecting sensitive information. 
Example: A company wants to let payroll staff see employee names and salaries but hide other sensitive details like Social Security numbers.
Without a view: To prevent access to the entire Employees table, the DBA would need to grant specific column-level permissions, which can be complex to manage.
With a view:
sql
CREATE VIEW Payroll_View AS
SELECT Employee_Name, Salary
FROM Employees;

-- The DBA grants permission to the Payroll_View, not the underlying table
GRANT SELECT ON Payroll_View TO payroll_staff;
Use code with caution.

 
Provide logical data independence
Views allow developers to create a consistent, logical representation of the database, shielding applications from changes to the physical schema. 
Example: If you need to refactor your Sales table by splitting it into Sales_Header and Sales_Detail tables, you can preserve the original view for legacy applications. 
Without a view: The schema change would require rewriting all application code that relies on the original Sales table.
With a view:
sql
-- Rename the original Sales table to Sales_Header
ALTER TABLE Sales RENAME TO Sales_Header;

-- Create a new view with the original name to combine the new tables
CREATE VIEW Sales AS
SELECT sh.order_id, sh.order_date, sd.item, sd.price
FROM Sales_Header sh
JOIN Sales_Detail sd ON sh.order_id = sd.order_id;
Use code with caution.

Applications that query the Sales view will continue to function without modification because the view's output remains the same. 
Standard views vs. materialized views
If query performance is a concern, a materialized view can be used. Unlike a standard view, a materialized view physically stores the query's result set, eliminating the need for repeated computations. 
Feature 	Standard View	Materialized View
Data Storage	No physical storage; only the query definition is saved.	Physically stores the query results in the database.
Performance	Performance depends on the complexity of the underlying query, as it's re-run on every access.	Faster for complex, frequently run queries because the results are precomputed and stored.
Data Freshness	Always up-to-date with the latest data in the base tables.	Not always up-to-date. Requires periodic manual or automatic refresh.
Ideal for	Infrequently accessed data, or when real-time data accuracy is crucial.	Reporting or analytics where performance is critical and a slight data delay is acceptable.
AI responses may include mistakes. Learn more



Data updates: Changes to existing data in the base table will be reflected instantly in the view. when it accessed right ?
Yes, that is exactly right. A standard view does not contain its own data. Instead, it is a saved query that gets executed against the base table(s) every time the view is accessed. 
How an update to the base table is reflected
A user or application updates data in the base table with an UPDATE, INSERT, or DELETE statement.
The next time a client runs a SELECT query against the view, the database engine executes the view's underlying query.
This execution pulls the most current data directly from the base table, including any changes that were just made. The updated data is then presented to the client as the view's result set. 
Standard view vs. materialized view
It's important to distinguish between a standard view and a materialized view, as their update mechanisms are different: 
Feature 	Standard View	Materialized View
Data Storage	Stores only the query definition; no data is physically stored.	Physically stores the query's result set.
Data Freshness	Always current with the base table because the query is executed on every access.	Can be stale because the data is a cached snapshot from the last refresh.
Updates	Changes in the base table are reflected the moment you next query the view.	Must be periodically refreshed (either automatically or manually) to get the latest data.
Performance	Slower for complex queries, as the calculation runs on every query.	Faster for complex queries, as the result is pre-calculated.
AI responses may include mistakes. Learn more



what is the use of materialized view if it has stale data? shall we use trigger to update a materialized view ?
Views on 'Materialized views'. When I was working for my ...
Stale data is an accepted trade-off in many business intelligence (BI) and data warehousing scenarios where performance is more critical than real-time data accuracy. For updating materialized views, triggers are a bad idea and can be problematic. The better approach is to leverage built-in, database-optimized refresh mechanisms. 
Why use a materialized view with stale data?
The speed of retrieving data from a materialized view often outweighs the cost of stale data for analytical purposes. For example:
Performance for complex queries: Materialized views store the results of complex queries with joins, aggregations, and functions. Instead of re-running a resource-intensive query every time a user loads a report, a BI dashboard can query the pre-computed materialized view for a near-instant response. A daily report based on data from the previous day does not need real-time data.
Resource reduction on source database: By offloading heavy queries to a materialized view, you reduce the processing load on the transactional (OLTP) database, freeing it up for other operations.
Historical snapshots: Materialized views can be used to create snapshots of data at specific points in time for historical analysis and trend reporting.
Offline analytics: In some cases, such as mobile or distributed computing, you may need a cached, local copy of data for analytics that does not require an active connection to the central database. 
Why you should avoid triggers for refreshing materialized views
Although some databases like PostgreSQL allow using a trigger to initiate a refresh, it is generally considered a bad practice. 
Performance overhead: Running a refresh for every single DML operation on a table is inefficient and can significantly increase the processing time of every insert, update, and delete. This can cripple the performance of a high-volume transactional system.
Risk of deadlocks and loops: Triggers add complexity to database transactions and can lead to issues like deadlocks and infinite loops, especially in multi-master replication environments.
Incompatible with incremental updates: A full refresh, often required by a trigger, is inefficient compared to the incremental refresh methods available in most database systems. 
Built-in refresh options are the right approach
Modern database systems offer optimized, declarative methods for keeping materialized views up-to-date. 
Refresh method 	Description	Best for
Complete refresh	The entire materialized view is re-created by re-executing the defining query.	Smaller datasets or infrequent updates.
Fast/incremental refresh	Only the data that has changed since the last refresh is applied to the materialized view. Requires materialized view logs on the base tables to track changes.	Large, frequently updated datasets where a full refresh is too resource-intensive.
On commit	Automatically refreshes the materialized view when a transaction on a base table is committed.	Environments with low concurrent write operations on the base tables, like data warehouses.
On demand/scheduled	The refresh is explicitly executed by a user or a scheduled database job (e.g., using DBMS_MVIEW.REFRESH in Oracle).	Batch processing, ETL pipelines, or when you need full control over the refresh timing.
Automatic/transparent	Some databases (like Snowflake) automatically handle the refresh process in the background. If a materialized view falls behind, the database can even fetch the newest data from the base table to guarantee freshness.	Environments where you want to minimize manual maintenance and trust the database optimizer.
AI responses may include mistakes. Learn more



which db offers these built in refresh methods?
Numerous database systems offer robust, built-in refresh methods for materialized views, ranging from manual updates to fully automated processes. The optimal refresh method depends on the database's architecture and your specific needs for data freshness and performance. 
Here are some of the database systems that offer built-in materialized view refresh functionality:
Cloud data warehouses
Cloud-native data platforms, often used for analytics, are known for sophisticated, automatic refresh mechanisms that minimize manual work.
Snowflake: Materialized views are automatically maintained by a background service.
Automated and transparent: Maintenance is handled automatically and transparently by Snowflake's background service. You don't need to schedule refreshes manually.
Current data access: Even if a materialized view is not perfectly up-to-date, Snowflake can combine the cached data with the latest changes from the base table to return a completely current result.
Google BigQuery: Materialized views can be set to automatically refresh on a configurable schedule.
Automatic refresh: By default, BigQuery automatically refreshes a materialized view within 30 minutes of a base table change.
Manual refresh: You can also trigger a manual refresh at any time.
Amazon Redshift: Offers both manual and automatic options for refreshing materialized views.
Automatic refresh: The AUTO REFRESH option automatically attempts to update the view when the base data changes.
Incremental refresh: This option provides a more efficient refresh for certain types of views. 
Relational database systems
Traditional relational databases also provide powerful tools for managing the freshness of materialized views.
Oracle Database: Known for its highly flexible and advanced materialized view management.
Fast refresh: An incremental update using a materialized view log, which is a table that records changes to the base table.
Complete refresh: A full re-computation of the materialized view.
ON COMMIT: The view is refreshed automatically whenever a transaction on a base table is committed.
ON DEMAND: The view is refreshed by a manual request or a scheduled task.
PostgreSQL: Materialized view refreshing is primarily a manual operation, but can be automated with additional tools.
Manual refresh: The REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW command performs a full re-computation and locks the view during the process.
Concurrent refresh: The CONCURRENTLY option allows the view to be read while it is being refreshed, but it requires a unique index on the view.
Automated options: You can set up automated refreshes using tools like pg_cron for scheduling or by writing a trigger to call the refresh when the base table changes.
SQL Server: Called "Indexed Views" and are always automatically and incrementally maintained.
Automatic incremental maintenance: Updates to the base table trigger an immediate, incremental update to the indexed view. This requires a unique clustered index and other SET options for schema-binding.
Restrictions: Due to the automatic maintenance, Indexed Views have stricter limitations on the types of queries they can support compared to other databases. 
Specialized databases
Some databases have unique refresh methods tailored for specific use cases.
ClickHouse: This analytical database offers refreshable and incremental materialized views.
Incremental materialized views: These are updated in real-time as data is inserted into the base table.
Refreshable materialized views: Periodically re-execute the underlying query over the full dataset.
Databricks (Delta Lake): Offers incremental refreshes for materialized views, especially when using serverless pipelines.
Incremental refresh: Processes only the changed data. This requires the use of a serverless pipeline.
Full refresh: Re-processes all data in the source table. 
